Kmé kwé, Telusi, Danielle White, Wetapekesi Njuio'gonik Ktaqmkuk.
My name is Danielle White.
My roots are in Mikmaki territory on the west coast of Newfoundland, where I grew up,
and I'm of mixed Mi'kmaq and settler ancestry and I'm a member of the Albert Mi'kmaq First Nation. At Indigenous Services Canada,
I'm the Assistant Deputy Minister of Strategic Policy and Partnerships.
What it means to be an Indigenous person in a leadership role in the public service.
And one of the things that I'm guided by and it comes a little bit from my background, as I said, I'm of mixed Mi'kmaq and settler ancestry.
There are times where I've felt very much like an imposter, very mindful of the privilege I've had.
And because of the unique historical circumstances of Newfoundland joining Confederation in 1949,
at the time, for better or for worse, the Indigenous populations in Newfoundland were not recognized.
They were not registered under the Indian Act, and in some ways there were a lot of positive aspects to that.
I think about my own family and if in 1949, my grandfather, who fought in World War Two as a proud veteran,
had been registered under the Indian Act, he would have likely lost he would have lost the right to vote, certainly.
He would have likely lost many of his veterans benefits, which were something that his family, you know, relied on.
His eight children, including my mother, would have been taken away to residential school.
But because, you know, those unique circumstances, none of those things happened.
My life experience has been quite different in that, you know, I didn't experience many of the disadvantages of what it means to be,
you know, a status Indian in this country.
But it also means, you know, members of my family hit their identity.
They were ashamed of who they were.
We lost our connection to our culture, our language, to the broader Mi'kmaq Nation in Nova Scotia, P.E.I. and New Brunswick.
And it's something that our leaders actually, beginning around the time of the White Paper in the 1970s,
thought long and hard for, you know, gain that recognition, reclaim our identity and our status.
And it was only actually in 2009 that I became, you know, a status Indian registered under the Indian Act, which is a bit of a weird.
You know, experience to go through of the way of, you know, asserting and reclaiming your identity is to actually be registered under this very colonial
instrument in law that was the path that was chosen by my community and our leadership at the time.
But for me, it's always meant I've kind of walked in both worlds.
And as I get older, you know, have a growing understanding and appreciation for what it means to be Mi'kmaq,
I have been learning our language over the last number of years and the insight that provides
to our culture and our way of knowing has been really profound.
And so when I think about how I approach my work in the public service, there's a philosophy.
It's, as I said, a bit like what Nadine talked about a Mi'kmaq philosophy.
It's a relational approach that's called Etuaptmumk, and it means to eyed seeing
and the ideas that you see from one eye with the strengths and values of the Indigenous world,
of Mi'kmaq culture, of our way, ways of knowing and being.
But you see through the other eye with, you know, the best of what western, western ways of thinking Western philosophy has to offer.
And so, you know, in my work I always try to bridge those two things.
And the idea of two eyed seeing, it's not just something that, you know, Indigenous people can practice because
it's a way of thinking that acknowledges no one perspective is better than the other, but that,
these two WorldViews can exist in harmony, and we need to be informed by one another.
And so that in itself creates space for, you know, strength based, trauma informed approaches to our policy and programing.
It's, you know, how do we co-exist harmoniously and how do we find that balance  in our lives and in our work and in our relationships?
And most importantly, it means coming to the table with a lot of humility to practice two eyed seing you don't need to be an expert in Indigenous knowledge.
What you need  to come to the table with is an appreciation that there are things you don't know
and that there is inherent value in ways of thinking that are not your own.
And I think that's something that very much guides my work.
So, I will leave it there.
Wela'lioq, thank you.